Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's lecture
we're going to be looking at a very core formula
in set theory usually called the principle
of inclusion exclusion and it's telling us
something about sizes of unions and relating that
to sizes of sets and intersections the simplest
example is when we have two sets a and B and the
usual picture or Venn diagram that goes with it is
something like this so here this circle represents
the set a this circle represents the set B this
area in between here in red is representing the
intersection of the two sets and the collection
of all of the green area represents the union okay
and the principle of inclusion exclusion for these
two sets a and B it's usually stated this way that
the number of elements or the size of a union B
is the sum of the size of a plus the size of B
minus the size of the intersection a intersect
B now this result generalizes in a natural way
to more than two sets to in fact n sets and it's
really a core result in a modern set theory so
we're going to be looking at this result but
definitely with new eyes in this video so we're
going to learn first of all an extension of this
theorem where the emphasis is not with sets but
rather with multi sets and we're actually going
to understand this theorem in a fundamentally new
kind of way here is what the principle or theorem
looks like for three sets a B and C whether
Venn diagram looks something like this so the
statement is that the size of a union B Union C in
other words the size of the whole conglomeration
where we put everything together is equal to the
sum of the size of a plus the size of B plus the
size of C and then we have to subtract the sizes
of the three intersections the size of a intersect
B which would be that area there the size of a
intersect C which would be that area there and
be just like C which would be that area there but
then in addition we have to add the size of the
common intersection a just like bead ii c which is
represented by this little area here that's common
to all three sets so it was kind of an alternating
aspect we take the sum of these three and then we
subtract the sizes of those three and then we add
the size of that it gets smaller intersection so
we're gonna see that this formula common in fact
very standard very fundamental and useful though
it may be is actually but a shadow of a more
fundamental result and that more fundamental
result really becomes mostly visible to us in
the realm of integral or maybe even rational
multi-sets so we have to expand our thinking in
two very distinct directions we have to go from
sets to multi sets and we have to enlarge our view
to something called integral multi sets and they
will turn out that what we say for integral multi
sets will also extend to rational multi sets we
will talk about that some other time to give
an example of the inclusion exclusion theorem
or principle here is an application from number
theory that has to do with euler's phi function
so that's called the totient function it's a very
important function in number theory so if N is
a natural number five n is the number of numbers
less than or equal to n which are relatively prime
to n so we're counting the number of elements in
this set set M such that M is between 1 and n M is
also a natural number and M and n have no common
factor that's represented by the symbol that
means that they're relatively prime so for example
thigh of six is two because there are two numbers
namely 1 and 5 which are relatively prime to 6
in the range 1 to 6 5 7 is 6 because there are
six numbers relatively prime to seven namely one
two three four five and six and five eight is four
because there are four number is relatively prime
to eight it's not hard to see that if P is a prime
then while all of the numbers up to P minus one
are going to be relatively prime to it so five
P is in that case P minus one and if P and Q are
both Prime's distinct Prime's then five P times
Q is P minus one times Q minus one so this five
function has a kind of a multiplicative aspect
at least when the two numbers here are relatively
prime okay so to understand why this is true is
a nice little exercise that sort of illustrates
the basic idea of inclusion exclusion so here's
just sort of a diagrammatic idea of the proof you
can think about it so let's make a box and let's
let this box represent all the numbers from 1 to
the product P times Q so all of the numbers are
in there and now inside that box we're going
to identify two sets first of all a which is
the set of multiples of P and B this one right
here which will be the set of multiples of Q so
we inside the numbers from 1 to P times Q there
are multiples of P namely P 2 P 3 P all the way
up to Q times P so the number of elements in a
is Q from 1 times P all the way up to Q times
P and similarly the multiples of Q range from Q 2
to Q 2 3q all the way to P times Q there are then
P of them so the size of B is P and what about
the common intersection between those two sets
which numbers are multiples of both P and Q
in this range well P and Q are primes there's
only one such number namely P times Q itself
okay so what would inclusion/exclusion tell us
about the union of a and B it will tell us that
the size of that Union is the number of elements
at a which is Q plus the number of elements in
B which is P minus the number of elements in
the intersection which is just 1 so we've got
P plus Q minus 1 is the size of that Union and
those are the numbers which are either multiples
of P or multiples of Q and so if we want Phi of
P times Q we want to count all the numbers which
are not having a common factor of P or Q with P
times Q in other words we want to take P times Q
minus this Union so P times Q minus the Union P
plus Q minus 1 turns out to be P times Q minus
P minus Q plus 1 which is this expression here
so inclusion/exclusion plays a natural and
actually important role in this kind of
number theoretical situation where we're counting
multiples and common divisors and things like that
so this inclusion exclusion principle is all well
and good but we want to go further and we want
to understand it in a bigger kind of way and in
order to do that I want to live it more formally
introduce this idea of integral m sets which I
have talked about a little bit informally but I
want to be a little bit more precise or say a
little bit more about that ok so let's remind
ourselves that if say M is an M set from five
what that means is that M is a km set from five
for some K natural number plus there was a number
of the form 0 1 2 etc in other words for example
we're talking about an M set whose elements are
all taken from 1 through 5 and there might be
zero elements in which case we have the empty
M set or there could be in this case 1 2 3 4 5
6 7 8 elements or there could be 3000 elements
it is no real limit on the number of elements
if we talk about M set 5 but all of the elements
actually have to be between 1 & 5 okay so that's
the kind of object were thinking about momentarily
and we've seen that this kind of M set can also be
written in an alternative way using our algebraic
properties of M sets the fact that we can add M
sets that we can multiply an M set by a constant
so we can rewrite this as 2 times the M set 1
representing those 2 ones plus the M set 3 plus
2 times the M set 4 plus 3 times the M set 5 so
this is a way of so bringing the objects together
kind of organizing the M set a little bit more
efficiently and we've seen that once we've gone
to that stage we can kind of go one step further
and create a new object which just records the
various multiplicities of the various objects
one through five so the possible elements that
occur in the same set are 1 2 3 4 or 5 and we can
record an M set by recording the multiplicities
that each one of those elements actually has in
the given M set we could maybe call this the list
of analysts use the word L because it actually is
a list so of em in this case is the list 2 0 1 2
3 that records the fact that we have two ones 0
to s 1 3 2 4 s and three fives so this list is a
list of multiplicities of the fundamental numbers
1 through 5 in the given M set em when I remind
you this is our notation for multiplicity so we
say that the multiplicity of 5 and M or M sub
M of 5 is 3 that's 3 there represents the fact
that there are 3 fives in our M set okay so now
we know that the entries of this list these are
general numbers natural numbers in that plus so
they can be natural numbers or possibly 0 and
these are just the multiplicities of these various
elements these numbers L as L ranges from 1 to 5
so to an M set we can associate a list and the
list has entries which are natural numbers or
possibly 0 and you may remember in a few videos
ago when we are talking about this that's true
opened up the possibility for us of maybe
being a little bit more general on thinking
about more general kinds of objects where we
allow these multiplicities to be also negative
numbers integers that's a very interesting kind of
enlargement of our point of view to summarize what
we've just done we started with the M set capital
M which was an M set from 5 and 2 it we associated
a list in fact it was a 5 list whose entries were
natural numbers or natural numbers including 0 so
now we want to extend the notion of em set to
what we might call an integral em set and I'm
going to write this in a somewhat novel way with
the of underlined bar here as one does when one
is typing in a name of a file or something on
your computer system and you don't want to leave
a space you want to connect this word but this
word so we use one of these sort of underscores
so I'm gonna do that to suggest to you that the
integral is not an adjective apply to em set
so we're not talking about looking at em sets
and then inside em sets and finding particular
things called integral em sets what we're doing
is rather going the other direction where we have
the notion of em set and now we want to enlarge
the notion of an am set to an integral M set so
this is a bigger notion not a smaller notion so
the idea is we're gonna let the multiplicities
of elements in these integral m sets the integers
not just natural numbers including 0 we're going
to allow the multiplicities of elements to be
also negative numbers so in general integers
this is going to give us a new type of object
which we're gonna write saying as int m set n
so in this case this means integral m set from
n where the elements of the m set are still one
of the numbers 1 2 up to n but now all the
multiplicities are allowed to be integers
possibly natural numbers possibly 0 possibly
negative numbers like minus 3 or minus 27 for
example here this set M is M set M actually
this integral M set M is given by the square
brackets and then there are these elements here
and we're going to adopt the convention that if
we have an element in brackets it means that
it hits occurring with negative multiply see
so this is an int M set from five because the
elements are all either 1 2 3 4 5 & 1 occurs
with multiplicity 1 5 occurs with multiplicity 2
2 occurs with multiplicity 2 the number 3 occurs
with multiplicity 0 but the number 4 occurs with
multiplicity minus 3 all right so what kind of
using a counting notation where that bracket
means that that 4 is actually a debt not an
asset it's to be counted negatively it also may
be have written it in red but we'll just stick
with this bracket notation alright so this means
these things here are all negative multiplicities
and so the associated list of multiplicities would
be well there's one one there's two twos there's
zero threes and there are minus three fours there
they are there's minus three of them and there are
two fives so it's just as before we end up with
a list but now the elements of the list can be
integers not just natural numbers or a zero so
we're extending our view to so-called integral
MSS we're broadening our vision but you might
well say well this doesn't make any sense you
know what does it mean to have minus three fours
well this is the same kind of dilemma that your
sixteenth century mathematicians like Descartes
felt about negative numbers what does it mean
to have negative three cows you know what does
that mean is is negative three really a number
people debated this and in fact they were in many
situations reluctant to accept numbers like minus
3 or minus 5 or minus 3 halves as legitimate
solutions to equations they wanted to separate
the positive numbers which really made sense
with these negative numbers which would sort of
artificial constructs these days students are
taught to have a more wide accepting tolerant
view of negative numbers and mathematicians
generally often think of negative numbers and
positive numbers as really just two sides of the
same coin one is not better than the other they
had equal sort of merit but that's a relatively
modern concept and what we're doing here is really
pushing that concept into the realm of data
structures saying well if we're going to talk
about the negative number minus three and we're
willing to admit that there might be something
like minus three cows then we might as well allow
data collections in which minus three cows figure
we have two horses seven pigs and minus three
cows on our farm okay maybe there's some sense
to that right that's what we're doing here okay
so we can now extend our algebra of multi-sets to
these integral M sets and in particular not only
do we have addition Union and intersection as we
already have talked about quite a lot but we now
also have subtraction this is the beauty of having
integers this is what having integers does for you
is that you can systematically subtract you cannot
just subtract like five minus three but you can
also subtract five minus 27 that doesn't bother
you you don't have to fuss around about whether
the numbers are in the right range you can always
subtract so similarly now we're in a position of
being able to subtract m sets if we're in this
realm of integral m sets and that's exactly what
we're going to need for the inclusion exclusion
theorem okay so let's remind ourselves sort of
how the story goes so addition of sets remember
that just means we're sort of putting everything
together and we're basically adding multiplicities
of any elements so if we have the M set three and
one with negative multiplicity one with negative
monthly city and four and then here's another am
set to one and four with negative multiple city if
we put those all together that altogether we have
a single three we have a single - how many ones do
we have well we had - two ones here and we had one
one there that gives us a total of minus one one
there's the minus one one in the sum and how many
fours do we have all together well here we had one
four and here we have minus one for when we add
those the multiplicities add so we have zero for
us altogether so there are no more fours in the
sum how about Union take the same two m sets and
we take their union then we're taking the maximum
of the multiplicities for each of the elements so
how many threes are there there's one three here
and no threes they're the maximum is that one
single three how many twos are that there's a two
here and none there there's a single two in the
maximum or the Union here we have minus two ones
and here we have 1 1 the maximum of those is 1 1
here we have a 4 and here we have a minus 4 the
maximum of that is for multiplicity of 1 so we
have a single 4 in the Union intersection is the
same story except now we're taking the minimum of
all the multiplicities so there's a 3 here but no
3 there so the minimum of that is 0 so there's no
3 in the result there's a 2 here but no - there's
the minimum is 0 so there's no 2 and the result
there's - two ones and one one over here the
minimum of that is minus two so it'll be minus two
ones in the intersection and the minimum of 1 4
and minus 1 4 is minus 1 4 so there will be minus
1 4 in the in the intersection and now finally
our new operation that we couldn't do before we
can now subtract you know kind of an honest way
not that sort of parcels of direction that we
considered before but really a genuine subtraction
of em sets is now possible in this realm so 3-1
negatively 1 negatively and 4 subtract 2 1 & 4
negatively gives us 1 well there's a 3 there's
now going to be minus 3 ones because there's minus
2 of them here and then we're subtracting another
one so that's a total of minus 3 how many fours
well there's one for here and there's minus 1 for
there so if we take 1 4 and we subtract minus 1
we get 2 fours so we have two fours in the final
result and there's zero twos here and one two
there so when we subtract we get a negative 2
so at the level of individual elements these
operations correspond exactly to just addition
Union intersection and subtraction of
multiplicities if we just focus on say
the threes then each one of these operations
just corresponds to either adding the numbers
of threes or taking their Union or taking
their intersection or taking their differences
so a so wider more flexible arithmetic that
we gained by introducing these integral amp
sets exactly the same kind of advantage that we
have when we introduced integers into ordinary
arithmetic we can then do subtraction more
uniformly ok so now we can state the inclusion
exclusion theorem and notice that I'm not going
to call it the principle of inclusion exclusion
my experience is that when we talking about
principles there's often some confusion or
ambiguity not far away so principle is a kind of
a word that people use when they're not really
sure about something and they have to kind of
pull the wool over somebody's eyes perhaps their
own eyes and they like to use the word principle
to make this a little bit more palatable is not
a principle this is a theorem just left theorem
like any other theorem and and here is actually
the theorem in a more wider and more powerful
context that it's usually found so this theorem
is found in you know many many many texts but
I think one could make the case that this is
actually really the correct way of thinking about
it and it's probably a novel formulation so it may
be in fact the first time where this theorem has
actually been stated correctly interesting ok so
what is our formulation of this so let's let
n be a natural number and suppose that we have
integral m sets from n so we're not talking about
general sets or m sets we're being specific like
we like to be so all of our elements or entries
are going to be from 1 to n we fix that we have
very definite bound we know exactly what range
we're talking about ok so we've got these K
integral m sets from n capital M 1 capital M 2 up
to capital M K ok so here is then the statement
the statement is that m 1 Union M 2 Union up to
Union M K so this is the union of these K integral
m sets that's going to be another integral M
set so that integral M set is the same as the
integral M set that's represented by this long
right hand side so let's have a look what that
is there's a number of different components to it
the first is the sum of just the interval m sets
M 1 plus M 2 all the way up to MK so we have
to add those all up as integral M sets we've
just been talking about how to add integral am
sets we know how to do that that's what we're
doing here and now we're going to subtract some
other integral M sets in the context of algebra
of integral m sets we just established that we're
able to subtract again that's exactly what we're
doing here we're subtracting em sets so this is
the M set m1 intersect m2 m1 intersect m3 all
the way up to and we're gonna take all possible
combinations of two distinct M sets or integral
M sets in this range so all the way up to M K
minus 1 intersect MK and each one of those has
a negative sign in front of it then we switch to
triples of M sets and they're intersections so m1
intersect M to intersect m3 that's one trip then
m1 intersect m2 we just liked m4 that's another
triple we go through all the distinct triples up
to the last one which is say m k- to intersect
MK minus one intersect MK and each one of those
intersections of three and sets has a plus sign
in front of it and then we carry on so at the next
step we're going to do subtraction and we're going
to subtract all four tuples of distinct m sets
and then we're gonna add all five tuples of m
sets and so on until eventually the last stage
we're going to have the intersection of all K
of them so the final thing will be m1 intersect
m2 all the way up to intersect MK and that will
either have a minus 1 or plus 1 in front of it
depending on whether K is even or odd because
it alternates even odd even odd and so on so
let's have a look at what that actually looks
like concretely when K is 4 where we can write
down everything rather concretely and we can see
all of the terms so if K is 4 then the left hand
side is m1 Union m2 Union m3 Union m4 and then
we have the sum of the M s and then we subtract
all the various intersections m1 intersect m2 and
intersect m3 m1 intersect m4 and to intersect m3m
to intersect in m4 and m3 intersect m4 those are
all the possible ways of you know picking two
out of the four and now we're going to add the
various triple intersections so m1 intersect m2
intersect and three plus m1 intersect m2 intersect
m4 plus m1 intersect m3 intersect m4 plus m2
intersect m3 intersect m4 and finally we're
going to subtract the intersection of all four of
them m1 intersect m to intersect m3 intersect m4
so this is a statement about integral m sets
the left hand side is an integral M set the
right hand side is an integral M set composed of
adding and subtracting lots of integral M sets
and that's the statement of the theorem it's
a theorem about algebra involving interval m
sets so how are we gonna establish this theorem
well the key observation is to recognize that
the proof is really a direct consequence of
the corresponding fact about integers because
the multi set operations correspond exactly to the
operations on multiplicities in other words we can
look at what's happening one element at a time if
all of our elements are from the range 1 through
n then it suffice us to establish the result by
the corresponding sort of formula for each element
separately multiplicities of 1 multiplicities
of 2 all the way up to multiple see as of n
so there's a corresponding inclusion exclusion
theorem for integers which is logically prior to
the 1 for M sets the 1 for M sets really comes
down to this corresponding fact about integers
and the the statement for integers is really
pretty well exactly the same but I've taken
the liberty of giving you a different way of
writing it because it's often we have the sort
of summation notation so it's good to have some
experience and rewriting what we've done using
the summation notation so for integers suppose we
have K integers M 1 M 2 2 MK so these are little
M's representing the fact that they're integers
so the statement is then that the union of these
M is so M 1 Union M 2 all the way up to union
MK and that's represented by this expression so
there's a Union sign and underneath there is the
expression 1 less than or equal to I less than or
equal to K so K is fixed so I is running from 1
through K and we're taking the union of the M I
miss the way of writing m 1 Union M 2 Union Union
MK and then on the right hand side the first term
is the sum of all the M eyes so that's just the
sum as I goes from 1 decay of MI and then the next
term we can write it as with a minus sign and
then the sum as I and J range from 1 to K and
I is always less than J so that guarantees that
we're picking out all pairs of distinct elements
from 1 to K and for each one of those choices of
indices we have a corresponding intersection of
the numbers MI and MJ mi intersect MJ and then
the next term is the sum so it alternates plus
minus plus so here's next to plus and now we
have to take sums of things like look like this
mi intersect MJ just like ml and we agree that
the indices I J and L have to all be distinct
so we arrange that by having I less than J less
than L and all three of them go from 1 up decay
okay and then we carry on like that alternating
in sign taking more and more elements in the
intersections until finally there should be minus
1 to the K then back to this is the second last
term good meter so there's a minus 1 to the K so
the second last term we have K minus 1 elements
so we can write that as M I sub 1 intersect em i
sub 2 intersect all the way up to intersect em I
sub K minus 1 so because there's K minus 1 I don't
want to use ijl because I have to keep using new
letters so now I'm sort of changing our notation
for the label so the indices instead of I J and
L we're using I sub 1 I sub 2 all the way up to I
sub K minus 1 and these indices have to have the
property that they're distinct so we may as well
arrange that I sub 1 is less than I sub 2 is less
than all the way up to less than I sub K minus 1
and all of them have to be in the range between
1 and K and then finally the very last term is
where we have all of the M is m1 intersect m2 all
the way up to MK and that's got a minus 1 to the
k plus 1 so the inclusion exclusion theorem for
integral m sets is a consequence of this formula
for integers this is really a an arithmetic little
formula it's the formula of arithmetic so let's
see how we can prove the result for integers
and let's start by understanding what happens
when K equals 4 when we can be very explicit so
by symmetry let's assume that we have these four
integers M 1 M 2 M 3 & 4 and since everything is
symmetrical let's arrange that they're actually in
increasing order so M 1 is less than or equal to
M 2 less than or equal to M 3 less than or equal
to M 4 some of them could be equal to each other
but they're at least sort of increasing so here's
the equation that we're trying to prove so this
the K equals four version so here's the union
of all four the sum of all four and then here
we have the subtraction of all the various pairs
of intersections and then we have the sum of the
various triples of intersection and then we have
the difference subtract again the intersection of
all four of them so we want to prove that this is
an identity that's valid for all integers M 1 M
2 M 3 & 4 and we may as well arrange that they
had that relation all right so let's let's ask
ourselves how many times is M 4 going to occur
on both sides in other words when we evaluate
these various intersections and unions how many
of them are going to be actually equal to M 4
and let's agree that when we have something like
intersection of M 3 and M 4 that's the minimum
of M 3 and M for that the minimum of these two
things is always going to be stated to be M 3
even if potentially these are equal they could
be equal but nevertheless we're going to adopt
the convention that when we write M 3 intersect
M 4 we always take the minimum that's equal to M
3 that's a true statement so how many times
is M 4 going to appear here well this thing
here represents the maximum of these four numbers
and M 4 is the maximum by agreement so M 4 does
actually equal this so when we evaluate this
thing we're gonna get em 4 so there's an M for
appearing once on the left-hand side and the M
for appears also right there does it appear in
any of these other terms no it doesn't because
each one of these is an intersection meaning a
minimum intersection of two intersection of three
intersection of 4 and M 4 is the biggest one so
the the intersection of the minimum is never going
to be M 4 for all of these terms so there's 1 M 4
that occurs on the left hand side and there's
exactly one M 4 that occurs on the right hand
side and that's all now let's look about what
happens with M 3 so M 3 occurs not at all on the
left side because that's only m4m 3 occurs once
there and how many of these other intersections
are equal to M 3 well M 3 is the second biggest
one and that's going to occur as a minimum only
when we take M 3 intersect m4 so it's going to
occur right there this particular intersection
will evaluate to M 3 but none of the other ones
will so the total number of times the M 3 occurs
on the right-hand side is 1 minus 1 so it occurs
1 minus 1 times on the right-hand side which is of
course 0 so the m3s occur with the same number of
times on each side namely 0 how about the M 2 s M
2 occurs as 0 times on the left how many times it
occur on the right it occurs once right there and
how many M twos are going to occur here well and
to intersect an 3 that's going to evaluate to M
2 because M 3 is bigger than or equal to M 2 m 2
intersect m4 is going to also evaluate to M 2 so
there's going to be two currencies of M 2 coming
from these two terms and here of these terms this
one here will evaluate to M toby's M 2 is indeed
the minimum of these three and M 2 is not going
to appear here because it's the evaluates to M 1
so the number of M 2 s that appear on the right
hand side is 1 minus 2 plus 1 for a total of 0
which equals the number of M 2 is on the left
hand side and finally let's look at what happens
with M 1 there are 0 M ones on the left hand side
in terms of M ones there's one here and there's
what there is an M one there's an M one there's
an m1 there's three M ones appearing here with
the negative sign so it's minus three currants
is there and in terms of these ones there's
an that's an M one is the m1 is the minimum
of those three what is the minimum of those 3m
what is the minimum of those three not here so
we have 3m ones occurring corresponding those
terms and they all have plus sign so there's a
plus three and finally this last term let me know
Moe miss em one so M one will occur there with a
minus one so all together on the right-hand side
the M 1 occurs once minus three plus three minus
one for a total also of zero so the number of
M ones on both sides is also equal to zero so
overall we've sort of kept track of each one of
these terms how many times each one of them will
appear and we've seen that there's a complete
balance and so that the left-hand side actually
does equal the right-hand side this is an identity
valid for all integers M 1 M 2 M 3 M 4 satisfying
this relation and that proves this identity for K
equals 4 well what about the argument for K equals
5 or higher K or arbitrary K well it turns out
that it's really just a generalization of this
you can kind of see I hope that here we really
have binomial coefficients we're really having
the expansion of 1 minus 1 to the N and since 1
minus 1 do they hand is 0 at the end the story
is going to be really the same but I'd like to
leave this to you as an exercise to think about
to convince yourself that this argument extends in
a nice way to arbitrary K now I suggest that you
might like to look at what happens when K equals
5 so if you're wanting to clarify what's going on
here if you write down what happens with K equals
5 it'll become very clear to you what the pattern
is I hope and then you'll be able to see that it
generalizes to arbitrary K so that's essentially
the proof of the inclusion exclusion theorem
for integers and that gives us that a proof for
general integral em sets I still need to connect
our general formulation of inclusion/exclusion
with a usual formulation in terms of sizes of sets
so to do that let me just remind you a little bit
about sizes so for example if M was a km set from
n then we said that the size of M equals K that's
the size of M so for example of M is this M set
here then its size is 6 we just count the number
of elements and if here is the list of M this is
a different M set has three ones zero two zero
threes four fours and two fives then in this case
the size of M can be read off as the sum of the
multiplicities it's nine and this notion of size
has some pleasant properties in particular when
we add two M sets then the size of M plus N is he
put it the size of M plus the size of N and if we
multiply an M set by a scalar or a number like
n if we multiply an M set by two I remind you
that just means that we double all the elements
so the size of n M is n times the size of M now
these notions extend to integral M sets so for
example if we have M the integral M set one one to
negative coefficient to the negative coefficient
to the negative coefficient four and five then
the size of M is what we have to count how many
elements it has so each one of these contributes
plus one plus one and this contributes minus one
minus one minus one is also for a total of M has
size one at the level of the list if we have
an integral M set and its corresponding list is
0-1 4 minus 2 8 so here this would represent a set
that has zero ones the number of twos is minus one
number of threes is four number phors is minus two
number Five's 8 well in that case the size of this
just for some of all these multiplicities which
would be 12 minus 3 and son died so the notion of
size just the sum of the multiplicities just as it
usually is works just as well for integral m sets
now for interval m sets since we're allowed to
do subtraction we have to augment our properties
of size to difference of sets so if we have the
difference between m sets m and m the size of
that is going to be the size of M minus the size
of n so now we can say that the usual inclusion
exclusion theorem let's call it a theorem because
that's what it is not a principal follows from the
more general theorem so here is the sort of usual
formulation given in terms of sizes of sets where
the size of the Union is equal to the sum of the
sizes of the individual sets minus the sum of the
sizes of the intersections plus the sum of the
size of the triple intersections and so on all
the way up to minus 1 to k plus 1 of the size of
the k fold intersection so this is then a direct
consequence of the fact that the size function or
size notion respects addition and subtraction and
it's then something that's was usually stated
only in terms of sets and you can see why it's
stated this way in terms of sets because in
terms of sets it doesn't make any sense to
add sets you fall outside of the realm of sets
if you do that and similarity it does make sense
to subtract intersections you can't do any of
that in set theory but that's a very limiting
way of looking at things as we've seen now so
I hope you now recognize this is just a shadow
the true inclusion/exclusion theorem which
is really about interval m sets and is really
making a statement about the algebra of m sets
directly in our next video i'd like to expand
on this sort of interesting role that m sets
play it's a very important message to try to
get people to think more broadly not just set
theory but M set theory very important bigger
picture to have in mind so when I will look at
some applications to number theory including
unique factorization and the relationship with
prime numbers okay so the interesting applications
of M set ideas I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening